CHAPTER Twenty
Attack on Mandar

‘How are you, my friend?’
‘What the hell am I doing here?’ asked a starded Shiva.
He found himself sitting in the Brahma temple in Meru. Sitting in front of him was the Pandit whom he had met during his first visit to Meru, many months back.
‘You called me here,’ said the Pandit smiling.
‘But how and when did I get here?’ asked Shiva, astounded.
‘As soon as you went to sleep,’ replied the Pandit. ‘This is a dream.’
‘I’ll be damned!’
‘Why do you swear so much?’ asked the Pandit frowning.
‘I only swear when the occasion demands,’ grinned Shiva. ‘And what’s wrong with swearing?’
‘Well, I think it reflects poor manners. It shows, perhaps, a slight deficiency in character.’
‘On the contrary, I think it shows tremendous character. It shows you have the strength and passion to speak your mind.’
The Pandit guffawed, shaking his head slightiy.
‘In any case,’ continued Shiva. ‘Since you are here, why don’t you tell me what your people are called? I was promised I would be told the next time I met one of you.’
‘But you haven’t met one of us again. This is a dream. I can only tell you what you already know,’ said the Pandit, smiling mysteriously. ‘Or something that already exists in your consciousness that you haven’t chosen to listen to as yet.’
‘So that’s what this is about! You are here to help me find something I already know!’
‘Yes,’ said the Pandit, his smile growing more enigmatic.
‘Well, what is it that we are supposed to talk about?’
‘The colour of that leaf,’ beamed the Pandit, pointing towards the many trees that could be seen from the temple, through its ostentatiously carved pillars.
‘The colour of that leaf?!’
‘Yes.’
Frowning strongly, Shiva sighed, ‘Why, in the name of the Holy Lake, is the colour of that leaf important?’
‘Many times a good conversational journey to find knowledge makes attaining it that much more satisfying,’ said the Pandit. ‘And more importantly, it helps you understand the context of the knowledge much more easily.’
‘Context of the knowledge?’
‘Yes. All knowledge has its context. Unless you know the context, you may not understand the point.’
‘And I’ll know all that by talking about the colour of that leaf?’
‘Yes.’
‘By the Holy Lake, man!’ groaned Shiva. ‘Let’s talk about the leaf then.’
‘All right,’ laughed the Pandit. ‘Tell me. What is the colour of that leaf?’
‘The colour? It’s green.’
‘Is it?’
‘Isn’t it?
‘Why do you think it appears green to you?’
‘Because,’ said Shiva, amused, ‘it is green.’
‘No. That wasn’t what I was trying to ask. You had a conversation with one of Brahaspati’s scientists about how the eyes see. Didn’t you?’
‘Oh that, right,’ said Shiva slapping his forehead. ‘Light falls on an object. And when it reflects back from that object to your eyes, you see that object.’
‘Exactly! And you had another conversation with another scientist about what normal white sunlight is made of.’
‘Yes, I did. White light is nothing but the confluence of seven different colours. That is why the rainbow is made up of seven colours since it is formed when raindrops disperse sunlight.’
‘Correct! Now put these two theories together and answer my question. Why does that leaf appear green to you?’
Shiva frowned as his mind worked the problem out. White sunlight falls on that leaf. The leaf’s physical properties are such that it absorbs the colours violet, indigo, blue, yellow, orange and red. It doesn’t absorb the colour green, which is then reflected back to my eyes. Hence I see the leaf as green.’
‘Exactly!’ beamed the Pandit. ‘So think about the colour of that leaf from the perspective of the leaf itself. What colour it absorbs and what it rejects. Is its colour green? Or is it every single colour in the world, except green?’
Shiva was stunned into silence by the simplicity of the argument being presented to him.
‘There are many realities. There are many versions of what may appear obvious,’ continued the Pandit. ‘Whatever appears as the unshakeable truth, the exact opposite may also be true in another context. It is the context or perspective that you’re looking from that moulds which particular reality you see.’
Shiva turned slowly towards the leaf again. Its lustrous green colour shone through in the glorious sunlight.
‘Are your eyes capable of seeing another reality?’ asked the Pandit.
Shiva continued to stare at the leaf as it gradually altered its appearance. The colour seemed to be dissolving out of the leaf as its bright green hue gradually grew lighter and lighter. It slowly reduced itself to a shade of grey. As a stunned Shiva continued to stare, even the grey seemed to dissolve slowly, till the leaf was almost transparent. Only its outline could be discerned. There appeared to be numerous curved lines of two colours, black and white, moving in and out of the outline of the leaf. It almost appeared as if the leaf was nothing but a carrier, which the black and white curved lines used as a temporary stop on their eternal journey.
It took some time for Shiva to realise that the surrounding leaves had also been transformed into their outlines. As his eyes panned, he noticed that the entire tree had magically transformed into an outline, with the black and white curved lines flowing in and out, easily and smoothly. He turned his head to soak in the panorama. Every object, from the squirrels on the trees to the pillars of the temple had all been transformed into outlines of their selves. The same black and white curved lines streamed in and out of them.
Turning to the Pandit to ask for an explanation, he was stunned to see that the priest himself was also transformed into an outline of his former self. White curved lines were flooding out of him with frightening intensity. Strangely though, there were no black lines around him.
‘What the...’
Shiva’s words were stopped by the outline of the Pandit pointing back at him. ‘Look at yourself, my Karmasaafhi,’ advised the Pandit.
Shiva looked down. ‘I’ll be damned!’
His body too had been transformed into an outline, completely transparent inside. Torrents of black curved lines were gushing furiously into him. He looked at the lines closely to notice that that they were not lines at all. They were, in fact, tiny waves which were jet black in colour. The waves were so tiny that from even a slight distance, they appeared like lines. There wasn’t even a hint of the white waves close to Shiva’s outlined body. ‘What the hell is going on?’
‘The white waves are positive energy and the black negative,’ said the Pandit’s outline. ‘They are both important. Their balance crucial. If they fall out of sync, cataclysm will occur.’
Shiva looked up at the Pandit, puzzled. ‘So why is there no positive energy around me? And no negative energy around you?’
‘Because we balance each other. The Vishnu’s role is to transmit positive energy’ said the Pandit. The white lines pouring feverishly out of the Pandit seemed to flutter a bit whenever he spoke. ‘And the Mahadev’s role is to absorb the negative. Search for it. Search for negative energy and you will fulfil your destiny as a Mahadev.’
‘But I am no Mahadev. My deeds till now don’t make me deserve that tide.’
‘It doesn’t work that way, my friend. You don’t earn a tide after you have done your deeds. You do your deeds because of and only after you believe that you already are the Mahadev. It doesn’t matter what others think. It’s about what you believe. Believe you are the Mahadev, and you will be one.’
Shiva frowned.
‘Believe!’ repeated the Pandit.
BOOM! A distant reverberation echoed through the ambience. Shiva turned his eyes towards the horizon.
‘It sounds like an explosion,’ whispered the Pandit’s outline.
The distant, insistent voice of Sati came riding in. 
‘S-H-I-V-A...’
BOOM! Another explosion.
‘S-H-I-V-A...’
‘It looks like your wife needs you, my friend.’
Shiva looked in astonishment at the outline of the Pandit, unable to decipher where the sound came from.
‘Maybe you should wake up,’ advised the Pandit’s disembodied voice.
‘S-H-I-V-A’
A groggy Shiva woke up to find Sati staring at him with concern. He was still a little bleary from the outlandishly strange dream state that he had just been yanked out of.
‘Shiva!’
BOOM!
‘What the hell was that?’ cried Shiva, alert now.
‘Someone is using daivi astras!’
‘What? What are daivi astras?’
A clearly stunned Sati spoke agitatedly, ‘Divine weapons! But Lord Rudra destroyed all the daivi astras! Nobody has access to them anymore!’
Shiva was completely alert by now, his battle instincts primed. ‘Sati, get ready. Wear your armour. Bind your weapons.’
Sati responded swiftly. Shiva slipped on his armour, coupled his shield to it and tied his sword to his waist. He slipped on his quiver smoothly and picked up his bow. Noting that Sati was ready, he kicked the door open. Taman and eight other guards had their swords drawn, ready to defend their Neelkanth against any attack.
‘My Lord, you should wait inside,’ said Taman. ‘We will hold the attackers here.’
Shiva stared hard at Taman, his eyes frowning at Taman’s well–intentioned words. Taman immediately stepped aside. ‘I am sorry, my Lord. We will follow you.’
Before Shiva could react, they heard footsteps rushing in their hallway. Shiva immediately drew his sword. He strained his ears to assess the threat.
Four footsteps. Just two men to attack a royal hallway! This didn’t make sense.
One pair of footsteps dragged slightly. The terrorist was clearly a large man using considerable willpower to make his feet move faster than his girth allowed.
‘Stand down, soldiers,’ ordered Shiva suddenly. ‘They are friends.’
Nandi and Veerbhadra emerged around the corner, running hard, with their swords at the ready.
‘Are you alright, my Lord?’ asked Nandi, admirably not out of breath.
‘Yes. We are all safe. Did the two of you face any attacks?’
‘No,’ answered Veerbhadra, frowning. ‘What the hell is going on?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Shiva. ‘But we’re going to find out.’
‘Where’s Krittika?’ asked Sati.
‘Safe in her room,’ answered Veerbhadra. ‘There are five soldiers with her. The room is barred from the inside.’
Sati nodded, before turning to Shiva. ‘What now?’
‘I want to check on the Emperor first. Everybody, files of two. Keep your shields up for cover. Sati at my side. Nandi in the middle. Taman, Veerbhadra, at the rear. Don’t light any torches. We know the way. Our enemies don’t.’
The platoon moved with considerable speed and stealth, mindful of possible surprise attacks from the terrorists. Shiva was troubled by what he had heard. Or rather, what he didn’t. Apart from the repeated explosions, there was absolutely no other sound from the palace. No screams of terror. No sound of panicked footsteps. No clash of steel. Nothing. Either the terrorists had not begun their real attack as yet. Or, Shiva was late and the attack was already over. Shiva frowned as a third alternative occurred to him. Maybe there were no terrorists in the palace itself. Maybe the attack was being mounted from a distance, with the daivi astras that Sati spoke of.
Shiva’s platoon reached Daksha’s chambers to find his guards at the door tense and ready for battle.
‘Where is the Emperor?’ asked Shiva.
‘He is inside, my Lord,’ said the royal guard captain, recognising the Neelkanth’s silhouette immediately. ‘Where are they, my Lord? We’ve been waiting for an attack since the first explosion.’
‘I don’t know, Captain,’ replied Shiva. ‘Stay here and block the doorway. Taman, support the captain here with your men. And remain alert’
Shiva opened the Emperor’s door. ‘Your Highness?’
‘My Lord? Is Sati all right?’ asked Daksha.
‘Yes, she is, your Highness,’ said Shiva, as Sati, Nandi and Veerbhadra followed him into the chamber. ‘And the Queen?’
‘Shaken. But not too scared.’
‘What was that?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Daksha. ‘I would suggest that you and Sati stay here for now till we know what’s going on.’
‘Perhaps it maybe advisable for you to stay here, your Highness. We cannot risk any harm coming to you. I am going out to help Parvateshwar. If there’s a terrorist attack on, we need all the strength we have.’
‘You don’t have to go, my Lord. This is Devagiri. Our soldiers will slay all the terrorists dim-witted enough to attack our capital.’
Before Shiva could respond, there was a loud insistent knocking on the door.
‘Your Highness? Request permission to enter.’
‘Parvateshwar!’ thought Daksha. ‘Observing protocol even at a time like this!’
‘Come in!’ growled Daksha. As Parvateshwar entered, Daksha let fly. ‘How in Lord Indra’s name can this happen, General? An attack on Devagiri? How dare they?’
‘Your Highness,’ intercepted Shiva. Sati, Nandi and Veerbhadra were in the chambers now. He could not allow Parvateshwar to be insulted in front of them, especially in front of Sati. ‘Let us find out what is going on first.’
‘The attack is not on Devagiri, your Highness,’ glared Parvateshwar, his impatience with his Emperor on edge. ‘My scouts saw massive plumes of smoke coming from the direction of Mount Mandar. I believe it is under attack. I have already given orders for my troops and the station Arishtanemi to be ready. We leave in an hour. I need your approval to depart.’
‘The explosions were in Mandar, Pitratulya?’ asked Sati incredulously. ‘How powerful were they to be heard in Devagiri.’
Parvateshwar looked gloomily at Sati, his silence conveying his deepest fears. He turned towards Daksha. ‘Your Highness?’
Daksha seemed stunned into silence. Or was that a frown on his eyes. Parvateshwar could not be sure in the dim light.
‘Guards, light the torches!’ ordered Parvateshwar. ‘There is no attack on Devagiri!’
As the torches spread their radiance, Parvateshwar repeated, ‘Do I have your permission, my Lord?’
Daksha nodded softly.
Parvateshwar turned to see Shiva looking shocked. ‘What happened, Shiva?’
‘Brahaspati left for Mount Mandar yesterday.’
‘What?’ asked a startled Parvateshwar, who had not noticed the chief scientist’s absence in the celebrations of the previous day. ‘O Lord Agni!’
Shiva turned slowly towards Sati, drawing strength from her presence.
‘I will find him, Shiva,’ consoled Parvateshwar. ‘I am sure he is alive. I will find him.’
‘I’m coming with you,’ said Shiva.
‘And so am I,’ said Sati.
‘What?’ asked Daksha, the light making his agonised expression clear. ‘You both don’t need to go.’
Shiva turned to Daksha, frowning. ‘My apologies, your Highness. But I must go. Brahaspati needs me.’
As Parvateshwar and Shiva turned to leave the royal chambers, Sati bent down to touch her father’s feet. Daksha seemed too dazed to bless her and Sati did not want to remain too far behind her husband. She quickly turned to touch her mother’s feet.
‘Ayushman bhav’ said Veerini.
Sati frowned at the odd blessing — ‘May you live long’. She was going into a battle. She wanted victory, not a long life! But there was little time to argue. Sati turned and raced behind Shiva as Nandi and Veerbhadra followed closely.