CHAPTER Twenty Four
A Stunning Revelation

Sati rushed out of her tent, followed by Krittika and Ayurvati.
‘A little slowly, Sati,’ cried Ayurvati, running to keep up. ‘In your condition…’
Sati turned and grinned back at Ayurvati, but did not reduce her pace. She sprinted to the royal tent where she had been informed Shiva and Parvateshwar had reached after the declaration of victory. Nandi and Veerbhadra stood guard at the entrance. They moved aside to let Sati in, but barred Ayurvati and Krittika.
‘I am sorry, Lady Ayurvati,’ said Nandi apologetically, his head bowed. ‘I have strict instructions not to let anybody in.’
‘Why?’ asked a surprised Ayurvati.
‘I don’t know, my Lady. I am very sorry’
‘That’s alright,’ said Ayurvati. ‘You’re only doing your job.’
Veerbhadra looked at Krittika. ‘I’m sorry darling.’
‘Please don’t call me that in public,’ whispered Krittika, embarrassed.
Sati pulled the curtain aside and entered the tent.
‘I don’t know, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘It doesn’t make sense.’
Sati was surprised at Parvateshwar calling Shiva ‘My Lord’.
But her joy at seeing Shiva safe brushed these thoughts aside. ‘Shiva!’
‘Sati?’ mumbled Shiva, turning towards her.
Sati froze. He didn’t smile when he saw her. He didn’t have the flush of victory on his face. He hadn’t even got his wounds dressed.
‘What’s wrong?’ asked Sati.
Shiva stared at her. His expression worried her deeply. She turned towards Parvateshwar. He looked at her for an instant with an obviously forced smile. The way he usually smiled when he tried to shield her from some bad news. 
‘What is it, Pitratulya?’
Parvateshwar looked at Shiva, who spoke at last. ‘Something about this war troubles us.’
‘What could trouble you?’ asked a surprised Sati. ‘You have delivered the greatest victory ever to the Suryavanshis. This defeat of the Chandravanshis is even more comprehensive than what my grandfather achieved. You should be proud!’
‘I didn’t see any Nagas with the Chandravanshis,’ said Shiva.
‘The Nagas weren’t there?’ asked Sati. ‘That doesn’t make sense.’
‘Yes,’ said Shiva, his eyes carrying a hint of foreboding. ‘If they are so thick with the Chandravanshis, then they would have been there in the battlefield. If they were being used by the Chandravanshis against us, then their skills would have been even more useful in the battle. But where were they?’
‘Maybe they’ve fallen out with each other,’ suggested Sati.
‘I don’t think so,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘This war was triggered by their joint attack on Mandar! Why would they not be here?’
‘Shiva, I am sure you’ll figure it out,’ said Sati. ‘Don’t trouble yourself.’
‘Dammit Sati!’ yelled Shiva. ‘I can’t figure it out! That’s why I am worried!’
A startled Sati stepped back. His uncharacteristic vehemence stunned her. He wasn’t like this. Shiva realised what he had done. He immediately reached his bloodied hand out. ‘I’m sorry Sati. It’s just that I…’
The conversation was interrupted as Daksha, accompanied by an aide, raised the curtain and swaggered into the room.
‘My Lord!’ cried Daksha as he hugged Shiva tight.
Shiva flinched. His wounds hurt. Daksha immediately stepped back.
‘I’m so sorry, my Lord,’ said Daksha. Turning to his aide he continued, ‘Why is Ayurvati outside? Bring her in. Let her tend to the Lord’s wounds.’
‘No wait,’ said Shiva to the aide. ‘I had said I didn’t want to be disturbed. There is always time to address the wounds later.’ Shiva turned towards Daksha. ‘Your Highness, I need to speak about something…’
‘My Lord, if you will allow me first,’ said Daksha, as enthusiastic as a little boy who had just been given a long denied sweet. ‘I wanted to thank you for what you have done for me. For Meluha. We have done what even my father couldn’t! This is an absolute victory!’
Shiva and Parvateshwar looked briefly at each other before Daksha garnered their attention again.
‘Emperor Dilipa is being brought here even as we speak,’ said Daksha.
‘What?’ asked Parvateshwar taken aback. ‘But we had sent some of our soldiers to their camp just a little while back. They couldn’t possibly have arrested him so soon.’
‘No Parvateshwar,’ said Daksha. ‘I had sent my personal guards much earlier. We could tell from the viewing platform that the Chandravanshis had already lost by the time the Lord and you began the third charge. That is the benefit of the perspective you get from a distance. I was worried that Dilipa might escape like the coward he is. So I sent off my personal guards to arrest him.’
‘But, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar, ‘shouldn’t we discuss the terms of surrender before we bring him in? What are we going to offer?’
‘Offer?’ asked Daksha, his eyes twinkling with the euphoria of triumph. ‘Frankly, we don’t really need to offer anything considering how he was routed. He is being brought here as a common criminal. However, we will show him how kind Meluha can be. We will make him such an offer that his next seven generations will be singing our praises!’
Before a surprised Shiva could ask what exactly Daksha had in mind, the crier of the Royal Guard announced the presence of Dilipa outside the tent. Accompanying him was his son, Crown Prince Bhagirath.
‘Just a minute, Kaustav,’ said Daksha, as he went into a tizzy, organising the room exactly as he would like it. He sat down on a chair placed in the centre of the room. Daksha requested Shiva to sit to his right. As Shiva sat, Sati turned to leave the tent. Shiva reached out to hold her hand. She turned, saw his need and walked behind his seat to sit down on a chair there. Parvateshwar sat to the Emperor’s left.
Daksha then called out loudly, ‘Let him in.’
Shiva was anxious to see the face of evil. Despite his misgivings about the absence of the Nagas, he genuinely believed he had fought a righteous war on the right side. Only seeing the defeated face of the evil king of the Chandravanshis would complete the victory.
Dilipa walked in. Shiva straightened up in surprise. Dilipa was nothing like what he expected. He had the appearance of an old man, a sight rare in Meluha due to the Somras. Despite his age, Dilipa had a rakishly handsome bearing. He was of medium height, had dark skin and a slightly muscular build. His clothes were radically different from the sober Meluhan fare. A bright pink dhoti, gleaming violet angvastram and a profusion of gold jewellery adorning most parts of his body, combined to give him the look of a dandy. His face had the crowfeet of a life lived well. A trimmed salt and pepper beard, accompanied by thick white hair under his extravagandy coloured crown, completed the effete look while adding an intellectual air.
‘Where’s the Crown Prince Bhagirath?’ asked Daksha.
‘I have asked him to wait outside since he can be a little hotheaded,’ said Dilipa. He looked only at Daksha, refusing to acknowledge the presence of the others in the room. ‘Don’t you Meluhans have any custom of offering a seat to your guests?’
‘You are not a guest, Emperor Dilipa,’ said Daksha. ‘You are a prisoner.’
‘Yes. Yes. I know. Can’t you get a joke?’ asked Dilipa superciliously. ‘So what is it that you people want this time?’
Daksha stared at Dilipa quizzically.
‘You have already stolen the Yamuna waters a hundred years back,’ continued Dilipa. ‘What else do you want?’
Shiva turned in surprise towards Daksha.
‘We did not steal the Yamuna waters,’ yelled Daksha angrily. ‘They were ours and we took them back!’
‘Yes whatever,’ dismissed Dilipa with a wave of his hand. ‘What are your demands this time?’
Shiva was astonished at how the conversation was going. They had just defeated this evil man. He should be repentant. But here he was, being condescending and self-righteous.
Daksha looked at Dilipa with wide eyes and a kindly smile. ‘I don’t want to take anything. Instead, I want to give you something.’
Dilipa raised his eyebrows warily. ‘Give us something?’
‘Yes, I intend to give you the benefit of our way of life.’
Dilipa continued to stare at Daksha with suspicion.
‘We are going to bring you up to our superior way of life,’ continued Daksha, his eyes marvelling at his own generosity. ‘We are going to reform you.’
Dilipa said with half a snigger, ‘Reform us?’
‘Yes. My general, Parvateshwar, will run your empire from now on as Viceroy of Swadweep. You will continue to be the titular head. Parvateshwar will ensure that your corrupt people are brought in line with the Meluhan way of life. We will live together as brothers now.’
Parvateshwar turned towards Daksha, stunned. He did not expect to be despatched to Swadweep.
Dilipa appeared to have difficulty in controlling his laughter. ‘You actually think your straight-laced men can run Swadweep? My people are mercurial. They are not going to listen to your moralising!’
‘Oh, they will,’ sneered Daksha. ‘They will listen to everything we say. Because you don’t know where the actual voice comes from.’
‘Really? Where does it come from? Do enlighten me.’
Daksha motioned towards Shiva and said, ‘Look who sits with us.’
Dilipa turned to Daksha’s right and asked incredulously, ‘Who’s he? What in Lord Indra’s name is so special about him?’
Shiva squirmed, feeling increasingly uncomfortable.
Daksha spoke a little louder. ‘Look at his throat, Oh king of the Chandravanshis.’
Dilipa looked again with the same arrogance towards Shiva. Despite the dried smattering of blood and gore, the blue throat blazed. Suddenly, Dilipa’s haughty smile disappeared. He looked shocked. He tried to say something, but he was at a loss of words.
‘Yes, oh corrupt Chandravanshi,’ scoffed Daksha, moving his hands for dramatic effect. ‘We have the Neelkanth.’
Dilipa’s eyes had the dazed look of a child who had just discovered that the hand that brutally knifed his back belonged to his beloved father. Shiva’s heart was disturbed with increased apprehension. This was not the way this meeting was supposed to occur.
Daksha continued his hectoring. ‘The Neelkanth has sworn to destroy the evil Chandravanshi way of life. You HAVE to listen.’
A bewildered Dilipa stared at Shiva for what seemed like an eternity. At long last, he recovered enough to softly whisper, ‘Whatever you say.’
Before Daksha could bluster further, Dilipa turned and staggered towards the tent curtain. At the exit, he turned around to look at Shiva once again. Shiva swore that he could see a few tears in those proud, haughty eyes.
As soon as Dilipa left the tent, Daksha got up and hugged Shiva, lightly, so as to not hurt the Neelkanth. ‘My Lord, did you see the look on his face. It was precious!’
Turning towards Parvateshwar, he continued, ‘Parvateshwar, Dilipa is broken. You will have no trouble controlling the Swadweepans and bringing them around to our way of life. We will go down in history as the men who found a permanent solution to this problem!’
Shiva wasn’t paying attention. His troubled heart desperately searched for answers. How could a struggle that appeared so righteous, just a few hours back, now suddenly appear wrong? He turned towards Sati, forlorn. She gently touched his shoulder.
‘What are you thinking, my Lord?’ asked Daksha, intruding into Shiva’s troubled thoughts.
Shiva just shook his head.
‘I just asked if you would like to travel in Dilipa’s carriage to Ayodhya?’ asked Daksha. ‘You deserve the honour, my Lord. You have led us to this glorious day’
This conversation did not appear important to Shiva at this point. He did not have the energy to think of an answer. He just nodded in an absentminded manner.
‘Wonderful. I’ll make all the arrangements,’ said Daksha. Turning towards his aide, he continued, ‘Send Ayurvati in to immediately dress the Lord’s wounds. We need to leave by tomorrow morning to make sure that we have control over Ayodhya, before chaos reigns in the aftermath of Dilipa’s defeat.’
With a namaste towards Shiva, Daksha turned to leave. ‘Parvateshwar, aren’t you coming?’
Parvateshwar gazed at Shiva, his face creased with concern.
‘Parvateshwar?’ repeated Daksha.
Taking a quick look at Sati, Parvateshwar turned to leave. Sati moved forward, holding Shiva’s face gently. Shiva’s eyes seemed to droop with the heavy weight of tiredness. Ayurvati lifted the curtain carefully. ‘How are you, my Lord?’
Shiva looked up, his eyes half shut. He was descending into a strange sleep. He yelled suddenly, ‘Nandi!’
Nandi came rushing in.
‘Nandi, can you find me a cravat?’
‘Cravat, my Lord?’ asked Nandi.
‘Yes.’
‘Umm. But why, my Lord?’
‘BECAUSE I NEED IT!’ shouted Shiva.
Nandi, shocked at the violence of his Lord’s reply, hurried out. Sati and Ayurvati looked at Shiva in surprise. Before they could say anything, he suddenly collapsed. Unconscious.

He was running hard, the menacing forest closing in on him. He was desperate to get beyond the trees before they laid their ravenous claws on him. Suddenly, a loud insistent cry pierced through the silence.
‘Help! Please help!’
He stopped. No. He wouldn’t run away this time. He would fight that monster. He was the Mahadev. It was his duty. Shiva turned around slowly, his sword drawn, his shield held high.
‘Jai Shri Ram!’ he yelled, as he raced back to the clearing. The bushy thorns slashed his legs. Bleeding and terrified, he ran hard.
I will reach her in time. I will not fail her again.
My blood will wash away my sin. He sprang through the last clump of shrubs, letting the thorns cut greedily at his flesh, and leapt into the clearing. His shield held defensively, his sword gripped low to retaliate. But nobody attacked. It was a strange laughter that finally broke his concentration. He lowered his shield. Slowly.
‘Oh Lord!’ he shrieked in agony.
The woman lay stricken on the ground, a short sword buried into her heart. The little boy stood on her side. Stunned. His hand bloodied with the struggle of his kill. The hairy monster sat on the rocky ledge, pointing at the little boy. Laughing.
‘NO!’ screamed Shiva, as he jerked himself awake.
‘What happened, Shiva?’ asked a worried Sati, darting to hold his hand.
Shiva looked around the room, startled. A worried Parvateshwar and Ayurvati got up too. ‘My Lord?’
‘Shiva, it’s alright. It’s alright,’ whispered Sati, gently running her hand along Shiva’s face.
‘You were poisoned, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘We think that some of the Chandravanshi soldiers may have had poisoned weapons. It has affected many others as well.’
Shiva slowly regained his composure. He got off his bed. Sati tried to help him up, but he insisted on doing it himself. His throat felt excruciatingly parched. He stumbled over to the ewer, followed closely by Sati. He reached over and gulped down some water.
‘It seems like I have been asleep for many hours,’ said Shiva, finally noticing the lamps and dark sky beyond.
‘Yes,’ said a worried Ayurvati. ‘Close to thirty-six hours.’
‘Thirty-six hours!’ cried a surprised Shiva, before collapsing on to a comfortable chair. He noticed a forbidding figure sitting at the back, his right eye covered in a bandage, his amputated left hand in a sling. ‘Drapaku?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Drapaku, as he tried to get up and salute.
‘My God, Drapaku! It’s so good to see you. Please sit down!’
‘It is heavenly to see you, my Lord,’
‘How was your end of the battle?’
‘I lost too many men, my Lord. Almost half of them. And this arm and eye,’ whispered Drapaku. ‘But by your grace, we held them till the main battle was won.’
‘It wasn’t my grace, my friend. It was your bravery,’ said Shiva. ‘I am proud of you.’
‘Thank you, my Lord.’
Sati stood next to her husband, gently caressing his hair. 
‘Are you sure you want to sit, Shiva? You can lie down for a while.’
‘I have slouched around enough, Sati,’ said Shiva with a weak smile.
Ayurvati smiled. ‘Well, the poison certainly didn’t affect your sense of humour, my Lord.’
‘Really? Is it still that bad?’ grinned Shiva.
Parvateshwar, Drapaku and Ayurvati laughed weakly. Sati didn’t. She was watching Shiva intently. He was trying too hard. He was trying to forget, trying to get others to focus on something other than himself. Was this dream much worse than the others?
‘Where is his Highness?’ asked Shiva.
‘Father left for Ayodhya this morning,’ said Sati.
‘My Lord,’ said Parvateshwar, ‘His Highness felt it would not be right to keep Swadweep without a sovereign for so long, considering the circumstances. He felt it important that the Suryavanshi army be marched across the empire immediately, with Emperor Dilipa as prisoner, so that the Swadweepans know and accept the new dispensation.’
‘So we’re not going to Ayodhya?’
‘We will, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘But in a few days when you are strong enough.’
‘Some twelve thousand of our soldiers remain with us,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘We will march to Ayodhya when you are ready. His Highness insisted that Emperor Dilipa leave behind one of his family members with our unit as hostage to ensure that no Swadweepan attacks our much smaller force.’
‘So we have one of Emperor Dilipa’s family members in our camp?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘His daughter, Princess Anandmayi.’
Ayurvati smiled, shaking her head slightly.
‘What?’ asked Shiva.
Ayurvati looked sheepishly at Parvateshwar and then grinned at Sati. Parvateshwar glared back at Ayurvati.
‘What happened?’ asked Shiva again.
‘Nothing that important, my Lord,’ clarified Parvateshwar, looking strangely embarrassed. ‘It’s just that she is quite a handful.’
‘Well, I’ll ensure that I remain out of her way then,’ said Shiva, smiling.

‘So this route seems to make the most sense,’ said Parvateshwar, pointing at the map.
Shiva, and the other poisoned soldiers, had recovered completely over the previous five days. The march to Ayodhya was scheduled the next day.
‘I think you are right,’ said Shiva, his mind going back to the meeting with the Emperor of Swadweep.
No point in thinking about Dilipa. I’m sure he was acting during the meeting. The Chandravanshis are evil. They are capable of any deception. Our war was righteous.
‘We plan to leave tomorrow morning, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. Turning towards Sati, he continued, ‘You can finally see the birthplace of Lord Ram, my child.’
‘Yes Pitratulya,’ smiled Sati. ‘But I don’t know if these people would have kept his temple unharmed. They may have destroyed it in their hatred.’
Their conversation was interrupted by a loud commotion.
Parvateshwar turned with a frown. ‘What is going on out there, Nandi?’
‘My Lord,’ said Nandi from the other side of the curtain. ‘The Princess Anandmayi is here. She has some demands. But we can’t fulfil them. She insists on meeting you.’
‘Please tell her Highness to wait in her tent,’ growled Parvateshwar. ‘I will be over in a few minutes.’
‘I cannot wait General!’ screamed a strong, yet feminine voice from across the curtain.
Shiva signalled to Parvateshwar to let her in. Parvateshwar turned towards the curtain. ‘Nandi, Veerbhadra, bring her in. But check her first for any weapons.’
In a few moments, Anandmayi, flanked by Nandi and Veerbhadra, entered Shiva’s tent. Shiva raised his eyebrow at her presence. She was taller than her father. And distractingly beautiful. A deep walnut coloured complexion complemented a body that was bountifully voluptuous, yet healthy. Her doe-shaped eyes were in a seductive half-stare, while her lips were in a perpetual pout that was sensual yet intimidating. She was provocatively clothed, with a dhoti that had been tied dangerously low at the waist and ended many inches above her knees, while being tied agonizingly tight at her curvaceous hips. It was just a little longer than the loincloth that the Meluhan men tied during their ceremonial baths. Her blouse was similar to the cloth piece that Meluhan women tied, except that it had been cut raunchily on the top to the shape of her ample breasts, affording a full view of her generous cleavage. She stood with her hips tilted to the side, exuding raw passion.
‘You really think I can hide some weapons in this?’ charged Anandmayi, pointing at her clothes.
A startled Nandi and Sati glared at her, while Shiva and Veerbhadra sported a surprised smile. Parvateshwar shook his head slightly.
‘How are you doing, Parvateshwar?’ asked Anandmayi, flashing a smile while scanning him from top to bottom, her eyebrows raised lasciviously.
Shiva couldn’t help smiling as he saw Parvateshwar blush slightly.
‘What is it you desire, Princess?’ barked Parvateshwar. ‘We are in the middle of an important meeting’
‘Will you really give me what I desire, General?’ sighed Anandmayi.
Parvateshwar blushed even deeper. ‘Princess, we have no time for nonsensical talk!’
‘Yes,’ groaned Anandmayi. ‘Most unfortunate. Then perhaps you can help me get some milk and rose petals in this sorry little camp you are running.’
Parvateshwar turned towards Nandi in surprise. Nandi blabbered, ‘My Lord, she doesn’t want just a glass, but fifty litres of milk. We can’t allow that with our rations.’
‘You are going to drink fifty litres of milk?’ cried Parvateshwar, his eyes wide in astonishment.
‘I need it for my beauty bath, General!’ glowered Anandmayi. ‘You are going to take us on a long march from tomorrow. I cannot go unprepared.’
‘I will try and see what I can do,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘Don’t try, General. Do it,’ admonished Anandmayi.
Shiva couldn’t control himself any longer. He burst out laughing.
‘What the hell do you think you are laughing at?’ glared Anandmayi, turning towards Shiva.
‘You will speak to the Lord with respect, Princess,’ yelled Parvateshwar.
‘The Lord?’ grinned Anandmayi. ‘So he is the one in charge? The one Daksha was allegedly showing off?’
She turned back towards Shiva. ‘What did you say to trouble my father so much that he isn’t even talking anymore? You don’t look that threatening to me.’
‘Be careful about what you say, Princess,’ advised Parvateshwar fiercely. ‘You don’t know whom you are speaking with.’
Shiva raised his hand at Parvateshwar, signalling him to calm down. But Anandmayi was the one who required soothing.
‘Whoever you are, you will all be smashed when our Lord comes. When he descends to Swadweep and destroys the evil of your kind.’
What?!
‘Take her out of here, Nandi,’ yelled Parvateshwar.
‘No wait,’ said Shiva. Turning towards Anandmayi, he asked, ‘What did you mean by saying “when your Lord will descend to Swadweep and destroy the evil of our kind”?’
‘Why should I answer you, Parvateshwar’s Lord?’
Parvateshwar moved rapidly, drawing his sword and pointing it close to Anandmayi’s neck. ‘When the Lord asks something, you will answer!’
‘Do you always move that fast?’ asked Anandmayi, her eyebrows raised saucily. ‘Or can you take it slow sometimes?’
Bringing his sword threateningly closer, Parvateshwar repeated, ‘Answer the Lord, Princess.’
Shaking her head, Anandmayi turned towards Shiva. ‘We wait for our Lord who will come to Swadweep and destroy the evil Suryavanshis.’
Strong lines of worry began creasing Shiva’s handsome face. ‘Who is your Lord?’
An unfathomable foreboding sunk deep into Shiva’s heart. He was profoundly afraid of his next question. But something inside told him that he had to ask it. ‘How will you know he is your Lord?’
‘Why are you so interested in this?’
‘I need to know!’ snarled Shiva.
Anandmayi frowned at Shiva as if he was mad. ‘He will not be from the Sapt-Sindhu. Neither a Suryavanshi nor a Chandravanshi. But when he comes, he will come on our side.’
Shiva’s inner voice whispered miserably that there was more. Clutching the armrest of his chair, he asked, ‘And?’
‘And,’ continued Anandmayi, ‘his throat will turn blue when he drinks the Somras.’
An audible gasp escaped Shiva as his body stiffened. The world seemed to spin. Anandmayi frowned, even more confused about the strange conversation.
Parvateshwar glowered fiercely at Anandmayi. ‘You are lying, woman! Admit it! You are lying!’
‘Why would I…’
Anandmayi stopped in mid-sentence as she noticed Shiva’s cravat covered throat. The arrogance suddenly vanished from her face. She found her knees buckling under her. Pointing weakly with her hands, she asked, ‘Why is your throat covered?’
‘Take her out, Nandi!’ ordered Parvateshwar.
‘Who are you?’ shouted Anandmayi.
Nandi and Veerbhadra tried to pull Anandmayi out. With surprising strength, she struggled against them. ‘Show me your throat!’
They held on to her arms and dragged her backwards. She kicked Veerbhadra in the groin, causing him to fall back in pain as she turned towards Shiva once again. ‘Who the hell are you?’
Shiva stared down at the table unable to find the strength to even glance at Anandmayi. He held his armrest tightly. It seemed to be the only stable thing in a world spinning desperately out of control.
Veerbhadra staggered back, held her arms tighdy and pulled her back as Nandi held her by the neck. Anandmayi bit Nandi’s arm brutally. As a howling Nandi pulled his arm back, she screamed again, ‘Answer me, dammit! Who are you?’
Shiva looked up for one brief instant at Anandmayi’s tormented eyes. The pain they conveyed lashed his soul. The flames of agony burned his conscience.
A shocked Anandmayi suddenly became immobile. The misery in her eyes would have stunned the bravest of Meluhan soldiers. In a broken voice, she whispered, ‘You are supposed to be on our side…’
She allowed herself to be hauled out by Nandi and Veerbhadra. Parvateshwar kept his eyes down. He dared not look at Shiva. He was a good Suryavanshi. He would not humiliate his Lord by looking at him at his weakest. Sati, on the other hand, would not leave her husband to suffer alone, by not looking at him when he was at his weakest. She came to his side, touching his face.
Shiva looked up, his eyes devastated with the tears of sorrow. ‘What have I done?’
Sati held Shiva tightly, holding his throbbing head against her bosom. There was nothing she could say to alleviate the pain. She could just hold him.
An agonized whisper suffused the tent with its resonant grief. ‘What have I done?’